THE letters translated in this book span the most productive period of my literary life, 
when, owing to great good fortune, I was young and less known. 
Youth being exuberant and leisure ample, I felt the writing of letters other than business 
ones to be a delightful necessity. This is a form of literary extravagance only possible 
when a surplus of thought and emotion accumulates. Other forms of literature remain 
the author's and are made public for his good; letters that have been given to private 
individuals once for all, are therefore characterised by the more generous abandonment. 
It so happened that selected extracts from a large number of such letters found their way 
back to me years after they had been written. It had been rightly conjectured that they 
would delight me by bringing to mind the memory of days when, under the shelter of 
obscurity, I enjoyed the greatest freedom my life has ever known. 
Since these letters synchronise with a considerable part of my published writings, I 
thought their parallel course would broaden my readers' understanding of my poems as 
a track is widened by retreading the same ground. Such was my justification for 
publishing them in a book for my countrymen. Hoping that the descriptions of village 
scenes in Bengal contained in these letters would also be of interest to English readers, 
the translation of a selection of that selection has been entrusted to one who, among all 
those whom I know, was best fitted to carry it out. 
RABINDRANATH TAGORE. 
20th June 1920. 
Glimpses of Bengal – An e-book presentation by The Spiritual Bee 6
BANDORA, BY THE SEA, 
October 1885. 
The unsheltered sea heaves and heaves and blanches into foam. It sets me thinking of 
some tied-up monster straining at its bonds, in front of whose gaping jaws we build our 
homes on the shore and watch it lashing its tail. What immense strength, with waves 
swelling like the muscles of a giant! 
From the beginning of creation there has been this feud between land and water: the dry 
earth slowly and silently adding to its domain and spreading a broader and broader lap 
for its children; the ocean receding step by step, heaving and sobbing and beating its 
breast in despair. Remember the sea was once sole monarch, utterly free. 
Land rose from its womb, usurped its throne, and ever since the maddened old creature, 
with hoary crest of foam, wails and laments continually, like King Lear exposed to the 
fury of the elements. 
July 1887. 
I am in my twenty-seventh year. This event keeps thrusting itself before my mind ⎯
nothing else seems to have happened of late. 
But to reach twenty-seven ⎯ is that a trifling thing? ⎯ To pass the meridian of the 
twenties on one's progress towards thirty? ⎯ Thirty ⎯ that is to say maturity ⎯ the age 
at which people expect fruit rather than fresh foliage. But, alas, where is the promise of 
fruit? As I shake my head, it still feels brimful of luscious frivolity, with not a trace of 
philosophy. 
Folk are beginning to complain: "Where is that which we expected of you ⎯ that in hope 
of which we admired the soft green of the shoot? Are we to put up with immaturity for 
ever? It is high time for us to know what we shall gain from you. We want an estimate 
of the proportion of oil which the blindfold, mill-turning, unbiased critic can squeeze out 
of you." 
Glimpses of Bengal – An e-book presentation by The Spiritual Bee 7
It has ceased to be possible to delude these people into waiting expectantly any longer. 
While I was under age they trustfully gave me credit; it is sad to disappoint them now 
that I am on the verge of thirty. But what am I to do? Words of wisdom will not come! I 
am utterly incompetent to provide things that may profit the multitude. Beyond a snatch 
of song, some tittle-tattle, a little merry fooling, I have been unable to advance. And as 
the result, those who held high hopes will turn their wrath on me; but did any one ever 
beg them to nurse these expectations? 
Such are the thoughts which assail me since one fine Bysakh morning I awoke amidst 
fresh breeze and light, new leaf and flower, to find that I had stepped into my twentyseventh year. 
SHELIDAH, 1888. 
Our house-boat is moored to a sand-bank on the farther side of the river. A vast 
expanse of sand stretches away out of sight on every side, with here and there a streak, 
as of water, running across, though sometimes what gleams like water is only sand. 
Not a village, not a human being, not a tree, not a blade of grass ⎯ the only breaks in 
the monotonous whiteness are gaping cracks which in places show the layer of moist, 
black clay underneath. 
Looking towards the East, there is endless blue above, endless white beneath. Sky 
empty, earth empty too ⎯ the emptiness below hard and barren, that overhead arched 
and ethereal ⎯ one could hardly find elsewhere such a picture of stark desolation. 
But on turning to the West, there is water, the currentless bend of the river, fringed with 
its high bank, up to which spread the village groves with cottages peeping through ⎯ all 
like an enchanting dream in the evening light. I say "the evening light," because in the 
evening we wander out, and so that aspect is impressed on my mind. 
Glimpses of Bengal – An e-book presentation by The Spiritual Bee 8
SHAZADPUR, 1890. 
The magistrate was sitting in the verandah of his tent dispensing justice to the crowd 
awaiting their turns under the shade of a tree. They set my palanquin down right under 
his nose, and the young Englishman received me courteously. He had very light hair, 
with darker patches here and there, and a moustache just beginning to show. One 
might have taken him for a white-haired old man but for his extremely youthful face. I 
asked him over to dinner, but he said he was due elsewhere to arrange for a pig-sticking 
party. 
As I returned home, great black clouds came up and there was a terrific storm with 
torrents of rain. I could not touch a book, it was impossible to write, so in the I-know-notwhat mood I wandered about from room to room. It had become quite dark, the thunder 
was continually pealing, the lightning gleaming flash after flash, and every now and then 
sudden gusts of wind would get hold of the big lichi tree by the neck and give its shaggy 
top a thorough shaking. The hollow in front of the house soon filled with water, and as I 
paced about, it suddenly struck me that I ought to offer the shelter of the house to the 
magistrate. 
